chore: add KIC 3 upgrade guide (#6369)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/kubernetes-ingress-controller/upgrade/kic.md

purpose: |
  How do I upgrade the Kong Ingress Controller. Are there any pitfalls?
---

## Upgrade {{ site.kic_product_name }}

{:.important}
> If you are upgrading to {{ site.kic_product_name }}, read the [upgrading to 3.0 section first](#upgrade-30)

### Prerequisites

> 1. Use Helm as your deployment mechanism. As of {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0, [Helm](https://github.com/Kong/charts/) is the only officially supported install method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Ensure that you installed {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0, using [Helm](https://github.com/Kong/charts/).
```

> 1. Run `helm repo update` to fetch the latest version of the Kong Helm chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Fetch the latest version of the Kong Helm chart using `helm repo update`.
```

1. Update your `values.yaml` file to use the latest version of {{ site.kic_product_name }}. The values to set are different depending on if you've installed with the `kong/ingress` chart or the `kong/kong` chart. You can find which chart you're using by running `helm list -A -o yaml | grep chart`.

{% capture the_code %}
{% navtabs %}
{% navtab kong/ingress %}
```yaml
controller:
  ingressController:
    image:
      tag: {{ site.data.kong_latest_KIC.release }}
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab kong/kong %}
```yaml
ingressController:
  image:
    tag: {{ site.data.kong_latest_KIC.version }}
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}
{% endcapture %}
{{ the_code | indent }}

### Upgrade

Run the following command, specifying the old release name, the namespace where

> you've configured {{site.base_gateway}}, and the existing `values.yaml` configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you've configured {{site.base_gateway}}, and the existing `values.yaml` configuration file.
```

{% navtabs %}
{% navtab kong/ingress %}
```shell
$ helm upgrade ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAME} kong/ingress \
  --namespace ${YOUR_NAMESPACE} \
  -f ./values.yaml
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab kong/kong %}
```shell
$ helm upgrade ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAME} kong/kong \
  --namespace ${YOUR_NAMESPACE} \
  -f ./values.yaml
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

After the upgrade completes there is a brief period of time before the new
resources are online. You can wait for the relevant Pod resources to complete
by watching them in your release namespace:

```shell
$ kubectl -n ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAMESPACE} get pods -w
```

Once the new pods are in a `Ready` state, the upgrade is complete.

### Rollback

> If you run into problems during or after the upgrade, Helm provides a rollback mechanism to revert to a previous revision of the release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run into problems during or after the upgrade, Helm provides a rollback mechanism to revert to a previous revision of the release.
```

```shell
$ helm rollback --namespace ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAMESPACE} ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAME}
```

You can wait for the rollback to complete by watching the relevant Pod resources:

```shell
$ kubectl -n ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAMESPACE} get pods -w
```

> After a rollback, if you ran into issues in production, consider using a testing environment to identify and correct these issues, or reference the [troubleshooting documentation](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/{{page.release}}/reference/troubleshooting/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a rollback, if you run into issues in production, consider using a testing environment to identify and correct these issues, or reference the [troubleshooting documentation](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/{{page.release}}/reference/troubleshooting/).
```

## Upgrade to {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0 {#upgrade-30}

> 1. **Switch to Helm as your deployment mechanism.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Switch to Helm as your deployment mechanism.
```

    As of {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0, [Helm](https://github.com/Kong/charts/) is the only officially supported install method.

> 1. **Upgrade Kong to version 3.4.1 or higher.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Upgrade Kong to version 3.4.1 or later.
```

>     {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0 requires Kong version 3.4.1 or higher. You must upgrade your Kong instances to 3.4.1 prior to upgrading to {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0 requires Kong version 3.4.1 or later. You must upgrade your Kong instances to 3.4.1 before you upgrade to {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0.
```

> 1. **Update the {{ site.kic_product_name }} CRDs.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update the {{ site.kic_product_name }} CRDs.
```

>     Helm does not upgrade CRDs automatically. You must apply the 3.x CRDs prior to
>     upgrading your releases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Helm does not upgrade CRDs automatically. You must apply the 3.x CRDs before you upgrade the releases.
```

    ```bash
    kubectl kustomize https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller//config/crd/?v3.0.0 | kubectl apply -f -
    ```

> 1. **Convert KongIngress `route` and `service` fields to annotations.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Convert KongIngress `route` and `service` fields to annotations.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Convert `KongIngress` `route` and `service` fields to annotations.
```

    Route (Ingress) and service (Service) configuration fields previously available in KongIngress are now all handled via [dedicated annotations][annotations] and will not be respected if set in `KongIngress`.

    For example, if you set the `route.https_redirect_status_code` in a `KongIngress` resource, you should now use the `konghq.com/https-redirect-status-code` annotation on an Ingress or HTTPRoute resource.

> 1. **Remove the `CombinedRoutes` and `CombinedServices` feature gates if set.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Remove the `CombinedRoutes` and `CombinedServices` feature gates if set.
```

>     The `CombinedRoutes` and `CombinedServices` feature gates have been enabled by default since versions 2.8.0 and 2.11.0, respectively. 3.x removes these feature gates and the combined generators are now the only option. You must remove these flags from the `CONTROLLER_FEATURE_GATES` environment variable if they are present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The `CombinedRoutes` and `CombinedServices` feature gates have been enabled by default in versions 2.8.0 and 2.11.0, respectively. Version 3.x removes these feature gates and the combined generators are now the only option. You must remove these flags from the `CONTROLLER_FEATURE_GATES` environment variable if they are present.
```

> 1. **Remove the `Knative` feature gate if set.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Remove the `Knative` feature gate if set.
```

>     As KNative is [no longer supported](https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/issues/2813), you will need to use another controller for KNative Ingress resources if you use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As KNative is [no longer supported](https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/issues/2813), you need to use another controller for KNative Ingress resources if you use them.
```

> 1. **Remove or rename outdated CLI arguments and `CONTROLLER_*` environment variables.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Remove or rename outdated CLI arguments and `CONTROLLER_*` environment variables.
```

>     3.0 removes or renames several flags that were previously deprecated, were

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Version 3.0 removes or renames several flags that were previously deprecated, were
```

KongIngress, you should now use the `konghq.com/https-redirect-status-code`
annotation on an Ingress or HTTPRoute resource.

##### Migrating header configuration

The [`konghq.com/headers.*` annotation][headers-annotation] uses a special
format to set headers. The string after the `.` in the annotation name is the
header name and the annotation value is the header value. For example, to apply
`x-custom-header-a: example,otherexample` and `x-custom-header-b: example`
headers to requests, KongIngress configuration would look like:

```yaml
route:
  headers:
    x-custom-header-a:
    - example
    - otherexample
    x-custom-header-b:
    - example
```

The equivalent annotation configuration looks like:

```text
konghq.com/headers.x-custom-header-a: example,otherexample
konghq.com/headers.x-custom-header-b: example
```

Note that you cannot apply multiple instances of the same header annotation to
set multiple header values: you must set the CSV format within a single header.

#### Migrating upstream configuration

The `upstream` section of KongIngress resources contains a complex object that
does not easily fit in annotations. 3.x uses the new KongUpstreamPolicy

> resource to configure upstream settings. The `spec` field of KongUpstreamPolicy
> is the same as the `upstream` section of KongIngress. For example, if you
> previously used a KongIngress like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
resource to configure upstream settings. The `spec` field of KongUpstreamPolicy
is similar to the `upstream` section of KongIngress (for exact schema please refer to [KongUpstreamPolicy reference](https://docs.konghq.com/kubernetes-ingress-controller/2.12.x/references/custom-resource-definitions/#kongupstreampolicy). 
For example, if you previously used a KongIngress like:
```

Author: Do we know what fields are actually different to call them out here? Trying to visually diff the schemas is probably annoying for as large as that config is.

Reviewer 3: Added more details regarding differences.

```yaml
apiVersion: configuration.konghq.com/v1
kind: KongIngress
metadata:
  name: sample-customization
upstream:
  hash_on: header
  hash_on_header: x-lb
  hash_fallback: ip
  algorithm: consistent-hashing
```

You will now use a KongUpstreamPolicy like:

```yaml
apiVersion: configuration.konghq.com/v1beta1
kind: KongUpstreamPolicy
metadata:
  name: sample-customization
spec:

>   hash_on: header
>   hash_on_header: x-lb
>   hash_fallback: ip
>   algorithm: consistent-hashing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  hashOn: 
    header: x-lb
  hashOnFallback: 
    input: ip
  algorithm: consistent-hashing
```

```

and apply it to a Service resource with a `konghq.com/upstream-policy:

> sample-customization` annotation. TODO confirm annotation, it's not merged yet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sample-customization` annotation.
```
It's merged now.
